.Dd 2025-02-02
.Dt DERIVEPASSPHRASE 1
.Os derivepassphrase 0.5a1.dev1
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm derivepassphrase
.Nd derive a strong passphrase, deterministically, from a master secret
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Bd -ragged
.Nm derivepassphrase
.Ar SUBCOMMAND_ARGS No .\|.\|.
.Ed
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Using a master secret, derive a passphrase for a named service, subject to
constraints e.g.\& on passphrase length, allowed characters, etc.
The exact derivation depends on the selected derivation scheme.
Each scheme derives
.Em strong
passphrases by design:
the derived passphrases have as much entropy as permitted by the master secret
and the passphrase constraints
.Pq whichever is more restrictive ,
and even if multiple derived passphrases are compromised, the master secret
remains cryptographically difficult to discern from those compromised
passphrases.
The derivations are also deterministic, given the same inputs, thus the
resulting passphrsases need not be stored explicitly.
The service name and constraints themselves also generally need not be kept
secret, depending on the scheme.
.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Ar export
Export a foreign configuration to standard output.
.
.It Ar vault
Derive a passphrase using the
.Xr vault 1
derivation scheme.
.
.El
.Pp
.
If no subcommand is given, we default to
.Ar vault .
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl \-debug
Emit all diagnostic information to standard error, including progress,
warning and error messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-quiet
or
.Fl \-verbose
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl v , \-verbose
Emit extra/progress information to standard error, on top of warning and
error messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-debug
or
.Fl \-quiet
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl q , \-quiet
Suppress all other diagnostic output to standard error, except error
messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-debug
or
.Fl \-verbose
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl \-version
Show version and feature information, then exit.
.Pp
This includes a list of known passphrase derivation schemes and known
subcommands, marked explicitly as either supported or unavailable.
.
.It Fl h , \-help
Show a help message, then exit.
.
.El
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Ev DERIVEPASSPHRASE_PATH
.Nm derivepassphrase
stores its configuration files and data in this directory.
Defaults to
.Pa \(ti/.derivepassphrase
on UNIX-like systems and
.Pa C:\[rs]Users\[rs]<user>\[rs]AppData\[rs]Roaming\[rs]Derivepassphrase
on Windows.
.
.El
.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.
.Ss With other software
.
Some derivation schemes are based on other software.
See their respective manpages for compatibility information.
.Pp
.
Affected derivation schemes:
.Ar vault .
.
.Ss Forward and backward compatibility
.
.Bl -bullet
.
.It
.Bo Since v0.2.0 . Bc
In v1.0,
.Nm derivepassphrase
will require an explicit subcommand name.
Defaults to the subcommand
.Ic vault .
.
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr derivepassphrase-export 1 ,
.Xr derivepassphrase-vault 1 .
.Pp
.
Further online documentation for
.Xr derivepassphrase 1
.Pq tutorials, how-tos, reference and design documentation
is available at
.Lk https://the13thletter.info/derivepassphrase/ .
.
.Sh AUTHOR
.
.Lk mailto:software@the13thletter.info "Marco Ricci"
.
