.Dd 2025-06-14
.Dt DERIVEPASSPHRASE-EXPORT-VAULT 1
.Os derivepassphrase 0.5
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm derivepassphrase-export-vault
.Nd export a vault-native configuration to standard output
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Bd -ragged
.Nm derivepassphrase export vault
.Op Fl f Ar FMT
.Op Fl k Ar K
.Ar PATH
.Ed
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Read the
.Xr vault 1 Ns -native
configuration at
.Ar PATH ,
extract all information from it, and export the resulting configuration to
standard output (as if using
.Xr vault 1 Ns 's
.Fl \-export
option).
Depending on the configuration format, this may either be a file or a
directory.
Supports the
.Xr vault 1
.Li v0.2 ,
.Li v0.3
and
.Li storeroom
formats, all of which inherently use encryption and integrity protection.
.Pp
.
If
.Ar PATH
is explicitly listed as
.Li VAULT_PATH ,
then use the
.Ev VAULT_PATH
environment variable to determine the correct path.
.Po
Use
.Pa ./VAULT_PATH
or similar to indicate a file/directory actually named
.Pa VAULT_PATH .
.Pc
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl f , \-format Ar FMT
Try the storage format
.Ar FMT .
May be given multiple times; the formats will be tried in order.
.Pp
.
By default, we first try
.Li v0.3 ,
then
.Li v0.2 ,
and finally
.Li storeroom .
.
.It Fl k , \-key Ar K
Use
.Ar K
as the storage master key.
.Pp
.
By default, we check the
.Ev VAULT_KEY ,
.Ev LOGNAME ,
.Ev USER
and
.Ev USERNAME
environment variables, and use the first one with a proper value
.Pq Em and only the first one .
.
.It Fl \-debug
Emit all diagnostic information to standard error, including progress,
warning and error messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-quiet
or
.Fl \-verbose
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl v , \-verbose
Emit extra/progress information to standard error, on top of warning and
error messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-debug
or
.Fl \-quiet
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl q , \-quiet
Suppress all other diagnostic output to standard error, except error
messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-debug
or
.Fl \-verbose
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl \-version
Show version and feature information, then exit.
.Pp
This includes a list of known foreign configuration formats and enabled PEP
508 extras (named sets of optional dependencies), marked explicitly as
either supported or unavailable.
.
.It Fl h , \-help
Show a help message, then exit.
.
.El
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Ev DERIVEPASSPHRASE_PATH
.Nm derivepassphrase
stores its configuration files and data in this directory.
Defaults to
.Pa \(ti/.derivepassphrase
on UNIX-like systems and
.Pa C:\[rs]Users\[rs]<user>\[rs]AppData\[rs]Roaming\[rs]Derivepassphrase
on Windows.
.
.It Ev VAULT_PATH
A default path, relative to the home directory, where to look for the
configuration to load.
.
.It Ev VAULT_KEY
A password with which the vault configuration is encrypted.
The password is interpreted as a UTF-8 byte string.
.
.It Ev LOGNAME , USER , USERNAME
Fallback values for
.Ev VAULT_KEY .
.
.El
.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.
.Ex -std "derivepassphrase export vault"
.Pp
.
.Ss Fatal error messages on standard error
.
.Pq Li %s Ns No " indicates a variable part of the message."
.
.Bl -diag
.
.\" Message-ID: ErrMsgTemplate.CANNOT_PARSE_AS_VAULT_CONFIG
.\" Message-ID: ErrMsgTemplate.CANNOT_PARSE_AS_VAULT_CONFIG_OSERROR
.It Cannot parse %s as a valid vault-native configuration file/directory
The file or directory is not a valid vault-native configuration.
Alternatively, the wrong format was assumed and/or the wrong master key was
provided.
.
.\" Message-ID: ErrMsgTemplate.INVALID_VAULT_CONFIG
.It Invalid vault config: %s
The file or directory was successfully decrypted and decoded, but the
resulting contents are not valid as a vault configuration.
.
.\" Message-ID: ErrMsgTemplate.MISSING_MODULE
.It Cannot load the required Python module %s
(Exactly what it says.)
.
.El
.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.
.Ss With other software
.
.Nm derivepassphrase export vault
fully supports reading the configuration formats used by
.Xr vault 1
v0.3 and lower
.Pq formats Li v0.2 No and Li v0.3 ,
as well as the
.Li storeroom
format used in development builds after
.Xr vault 1
v0.3
.Pq Li storeroom No version 1 .
.Pp
.
There is no corresponding
.Dq import
subcommand, nor is there support for writing configuration files or
directories in any of the aforementioned formats.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr derivepassphrase 1 .
.Rs
.%A "James Coglan"
.%T "vault(1)"
.%U https://www.npmjs.com/package/vault
.Re
.Pp
.
Further online documentation for
.Xr derivepassphrase 1
.Pq tutorials, how-tos, reference and design documentation
is available at
.Lk https://the13thletter.info/derivepassphrase/ .
.
.Sh AUTHOR
.
.Lk mailto:software@the13thletter.info "Marco Ricci"
.
.Sh BUGS
.
.Bl -bullet
.It
There is no support for writing
.Xr vault 1
configuration files or directories in any of the aforementioned formats.
.Pp
WONTFIX: two-way interoperability of configuration file disk formats is
currently out of scope.
Use the standard
.Fl \-import
and
.Fl \-export
options of both
.Xr vault 1
and
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
.Ns .
.
.El
.
