.Dd 2025-06-14
.Dt DERIVEPASSPHRASE-EXPORT 1
.Os derivepassphrase 0.5
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm derivepassphrase-export
.Nd export a foreign configuration to standard output
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Bd -ragged
.Nm derivepassphrase export
.Ar SUBCOMMAND_ARGS No .\|.\|.
.Ed
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Read a foreign system configuration, extract all information from it,
and export the resulting configuration to standard output.
.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Ar vault
Export a
.Xr vault 1
.Ns -native
configuration to standard output.
.
.El
.Pp
.
If no subcommand is given, we default to
.Ar vault .
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl \-debug
Emit all diagnostic information to standard error, including progress,
warning and error messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-quiet
or
.Fl \-verbose
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl v , \-verbose
Emit extra/progress information to standard error, on top of warning and
error messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-debug
or
.Fl \-quiet
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl q , \-quiet
Suppress all other diagnostic output to standard error, except error
messages.
.Pp
.
Cancels the effect of any previous
.Fl \-debug
or
.Fl \-verbose
options.
Also applies to subcommands.
.
.It Fl \-version
Show version and feature information, then exit.
.Pp
This includes a list of known foreign configuration formats and known
subcommands, marked explicitly as either supported or unavailable.
.
.It Fl h , \-help
Show a help message, then exit.
.
.El
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Ev DERIVEPASSPHRASE_PATH
.Nm derivepassphrase
stores its configuration files and data in this directory.
Defaults to
.Pa \(ti/.derivepassphrase
on UNIX-like systems and
.Pa C:\[rs]Users\[rs]<user>\[rs]AppData\[rs]Roaming\[rs]Derivepassphrase
on Windows.
.
.El
.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.
.Ss With other software
.
See the respective subcommand's manpage for compatibility information.
.
.Ss Forward and backward compatibility
.
.Bl -bullet
.
.It
.Bo Since v0.2.0 . Bc
In v1.0,
.Nm derivepassphrase export
will require an explicit subcommand name.
Defaults to the subcommand
.Ic vault .
.
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr derivepassphrase 1 ,
.Xr derivepassphrase-export-vault 1 .
.Pp
.
Further online documentation for
.Xr derivepassphrase 1
.Pq tutorials, how-tos, reference and design documentation
is available at
.Lk https://the13thletter.info/derivepassphrase/ .
.
.Sh AUTHOR
.
.Lk mailto:software@the13thletter.info "Marco Ricci"
.
