.Dd 2024-12-25
.Dt DERIVEPASSPHRASE-VAULT 1
.Os derivepassphrase 0.4.0
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm derivepassphrase-vault
.Nd derive a passphrase using the vault derivation scheme
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Bd -ragged
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
.Op Fl \-phrase | Fl \-key
.Op Fl \-length Ar n
.Op Fl \-repeat Ar n
.Op Fl \-lower Ar n
.Op Fl \-upper Ar n
.Op Fl \-number Ar n
.Op Fl \-space Ar n
.Op Fl \-dash Ar n
.Op Fl \-symbol Ar n
.Ar SERVICE
.
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
.Brq Fl \-phrase | \-key | No .\|.\|. | Fl \-symbol Ar n
.No .\|.\|.
.Fl \-config
.Op Fl \-unset Ar setting No .\|.\|.
.Op Fl \-overwrite\-existing | Fl \-merge\-existing
.Op Ar SERVICE
.
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
.Bro
.Fl \-notes
.Ar SERVICE
|
.Fl \-delete
.Ar SERVICE
|
.Fl \-delete\-globals
|
.Fl \-clear
.Brc
.
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
.Op Fl \-export\-as Brq Li json | sh
.Brq Fl \-import Ar PATH | Fl \-export Ar PATH
.Ed
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Using a master passphrase or a master
.Tn SSH
key, derive a passphrase for
.Ar SERVICE ,
subject to length, character and character repetition constraints, in a
manner compatible with James Coglan's
.Xr vault 1 .
.Pp
.
The derivation is cryptographically strong, meaning that even if a single
passphrase is compromised, guessing the master passphrase or a different
service's passphrase is computationally infeasible.
The derivation is also deterministic, given the same inputs, thus the
resulting passphrase need not be stored explicitly.
.Pp
.
The service name and constraints themselves also need not be kept secret;
the latter are usually stored in a world-readable file.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Ss Passphrase generation
.
The passphrase generation options can be divided into
.Dq passphrase source
options
.Fl ( \-phrase , \-key )
and
.Dq passphrase constraint
options (all others).
The passphrase source options are mutually exclusive \(em you may only
specify one of them \(em while the passphrase constraint options may be
combined in any way.
The
.Ar SERVICE
is mandatory (see synopsis\~#1), unless the
.Fl \-config
option is specified (see synopsis\~#2).
All character constraints refer to ASCII printable characters only (space
.Pq Li U+0020
to tilde
.Pq Li U+007E ,
excluding the grave accent
.Pq Li U+0060 ) .
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl p , \-phrase
Prompt for a passphrase.
.Pp
.
See also
.Sx Configuration
for how this interacts with a stored passphrase or
.Tn SSH
key.
.
.It Fl k , \-key
Select an SSH key.
.Pp
.
An SSH agent such as OpenSSH's
.Xr ssh-agent 1
or PuTTY's
.Xr pageant 1
must be running and accessible, and have the desired key loaded.
The SSH key must also be
.Em suitable
for this purpose; see
.Sx SSH key suitability
for details.
.Pp
.
See also
.Sx Configuration
for how this interacts with a stored passphrase or
.Tn SSH
key.
.
.It Fl l Ar n , Fl \-length Ar n
Force the passphrase to have the length
.Ar n .
Defaults to the length
.Sy 20
if not specified, or if explicitly specified as
.Li 0 .
.
.It Fl r Ar n , Fl \-repeat Ar n
Permit only runs of up to
.Ar n
consecutive occurrences of the same character.
Alternatively, forbid immediate additional repetitions of length
.Ar n
(or more) for any character in the derived passphrase.
Setting
.Ar n No = Li 0
disables repetition constraints, which is the default.
.
.It Fl \-lower Ar n
Include at least
.Ar n
lowercase characters in the derived passphrase.
Setting
.Ar n No = Li 0
forbids these characters entirely.
The default is to not constain the occurrences in any manner.
.
.It Fl \-upper Ar n
Include at least
.Ar n
uppercase characters in the derived passphrase.
Setting
.Ar n No = Li 0
forbids these characters entirely.
The default is to not constain the occurrences in any manner.
.
.It Fl \-number Ar n
Include at least
.Ar n
digits in the derived passphrase.
Setting
.Ar n No = Li 0
forbids these characters entirely.
The default is to not constain the occurrences in any manner.
.
.It Fl \-space Ar n
Include at least
.Ar n
spaces in the derived passphrase.
Setting
.Ar n No = Li 0
forbids these characters entirely.
The default is to not constain the occurrences in any manner.
.
.It Fl \-dash Ar n
Include at least
.Ar n
.Dq dashes
.Li ( \-
or
.Li _ )
in the derived passphrase.
Setting
.Ar n No = Li 0
forbids these characters entirely.
The default is to not constain the occurrences in any manner.
.
.It Fl \-symbol Ar n
Include at least
.Ar n
symbols (any of
.Li !\[dq]#$%&\[aq]()*+,./:;<=>?@[\e]\(ha{|}\(ti\-_ )
in the derived passphrase.
Setting
.Ar n No = Li 0
forbids these characters entirely, and effectively also implies
.Fl \-dash Li 0 .
The default is to not constain the occurrences in any manner.
.
.El
.
.Ss Configuration
.
The configuration options directly modify the stored settings: default
settings, known services, and service-specific settings.
They are mutually exclusive; you may only specify one of them.
The
.Ar SERVICE
is mandatory for
.Fl \-notes
and
.Fl \-delete ,
optional for
.Fl \-config ,
and forbidden for
.Fl \-delete\-globals
and
.Fl \-clear
(see synopsis\~#2 and synopsis\~#3).
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl n , \-notes
Spawn an editor to edit notes for
.Ar SERVICE .
Use the
.Ev VISUAL
or
.Ev EDITOR
environment variables to configure the spawned editor.
.
.It Fl c , \-config
Save the given settings for
.Ar SERVICE
(if given), or save the given settings as global default settings.
.Pp
.
See the
.Sx Passphrase generation
and
.Sx Compatibility and extension options
sections for other options compatible with
.Fl \-config .
.Pp
.
.Bf -symbolic
Do not use the
.Fl \-phrase
and
.Fl \-config
options together!
The configuration file is assumed to not contain sensitive contents, and is
not encrypted.
.Ef
.
.It Fl x , \-delete
Delete all stored settings for
.Ar SERVICE .
.
.It Fl \-delete\-globals
Delete all stored global default settings.
.
.It Fl X , \-clear
Delete all stored settings.
.
.El
.
.Ss Storage management
.
The storage management options deal with importing and exporting the stored
settings.
They are mutually exclusive; you may only specify one of them.
Using
.Li \-
as
.Ar PATH
for standard input/standard output is supported.
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl e Ar PATH , Fl \-export Ar PATH
Export all saved settings into file
.Ar PATH .
.
.It Fl i Ar PATH , Fl \-import Ar PATH
Import saved settings from file
.Ar PATH .
.
.El
.
.Ss Compatibility and extension options
.
By default,
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
behaves in a manner compatible with
.Xr vault 1 .
The compatibility and extension options modify the behavior to enable
additional functionality, or specifically to force compatibility.
.Pp
.
.Xr vault 1
supports none of these options, and behaves as if the option had not been
given or had been left in its default state.
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl \-overwrite\-existing No "" / "" Fl \-merge\-existing
When importing a configuration via
.Fl \-import ,
or configuring the settings via
.Fl \-config ,
overwrite or merge
.Em ( default )
the existing configuration.
.Pp
.
If overwriting the configuration, then the whole configuration
.Pq for Fl \-import
or the respective section
.Pq service-specific or global, for Fl \-config ,
will be written from scratch.
If merging, then each section
.Pq service-specific or global, for Fl \-import
or each singular setting
.Pq for Fl \-config
will be overwritten, but other unaffected settings/sections will not.
.Pp
.
.Xr ( vault 1
behaves as if
.Fl \-merge\-existing
were always given.)
.
.It Fl \-unset Ar setting
When configuring via
.Fl \-config ,
also unset the specified
.Ar setting ,
where
.Ar setting
is one of the passphrase generation settings
.Pq Li phrase , key , lower , No .\|.\|. .
May be specified multiple times.
Must not overlap with any of the settings being set afterwards.
.Pp
.
.Xr ( vault 1
does not support this option.)
.
.It Fl \-export\-as Brq Li json | sh
When exporting the configuration via
.Fl \-export ,
export as
.Tn JSON
(default) or as a shell script in
.Xr sh 1
format.
.Pp
.
The
.Tn JSON
format is compatible with
.Xr vault 1 .
For the shell script format, see the
.Sx SHELL SCRIPT EXPORT FORMAT
section for details.
.Pp
.
.Xr ( vault 1
behaves as if
.Fl \-export\-as Li json
were always given.)
.
.El
.
.Ss Other options
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Fl \-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.It Fl h , \-help
Show a help message and exit.
.
.El
.
.Sh SHELL SCRIPT EXPORT FORMAT
.
If the shell script export format is selected, the configuration will be
exported as a
.Tn POSIX
.Xr sh 1
script, containing calls to
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
to reconstruct the current configuration from scratch.
The script assumes a conforming
.Xr sh 1 ,
with support for
.Dq here
documents.
.Pp
.
.Bf -symbolic
Do not run these emitted shell scripts directly without double-checking
their output first!
.Ef
.
.Sh SSH KEY SUITABILITY
.
An
.Tn SSH
key is
.Sy suitable
for use with
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
if the
.Tn SSH
agent guarantees that signatures produced with this key will be
.Em deterministic ,
given the same message to be signed.
This is a property specific to the key
.Em type ,
and sometimes the agent used:
.
.Bl -bullet
.
.It
.Tn RSA ,
Ed25519 and Ed448 keys are always suitable.
.Tn OpenSSH Ns No 's
.Xr ssh-agent 1
supports only these keys as suitable keys.
.
.It
.Tn DSA
and
.Tn ECDSA
keys are suitable if the
.Tn SSH
agent supports deterministic
.Tn DSA
signatures, e.g. by implementing
.Tn RFC 6979 .
.Tn PuTTY Ns No 's
.Xr pageant 1
supports this, in addition to the always-suitable keys mentioned above.
.
.El
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Ev VISUAL , EDITOR
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
uses this editor to edit service notes when called with
.Fl \-notes .
.Ev VISUAL
has higher precedence than
.Ev EDITOR .
.
.It Ev DERIVEPASSPHRASE_PATH
.Nm derivepassphrase
stores its configuration files and data in this directory.
Defaults to
.Pa \(ti/.derivepassphrase .
.
.El
.
.Sh FILES
.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl p , \-phrase"
.
.It Ev $DERIVEPASSPHRASE_PATH Ns Pa /vault.json
The stored configuration for
.Nm derivepassphrase vault :
the default passphrase generation settings, the known service names, and the
service-specific settings.
This file is
.Em not
intended for the user to edit.
.
.El
.
.Sh SECURITY
.
.Bl -bullet
.
.It
There is
.Sy no way
to retrieve the generated passphrases if the master passphrase, the SSH key,
or the exact passphrase settings are lost, short of trying out all possible
combinations.
You are
.Sy strongly
advised to keep independent backups of the settings and the
.Tn SSH
key, if any.
.
.It
The configuration is
.Sy not
encrypted, and you are
.Sy strongly
discouraged from using a stored passphrase.
.
.It
You are
.Sy strongly
advised to avoid the
.Pq shell script
configuration export format if possible, and use the JSON format instead.
If you
.Em must
use the shell script format, then
.Sy always
validate the export before attempting to interpret or run it.
.
.El
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
.Dl $ derivepassphrase vault \-\-phrase email
.Pp
Prompt for a master passphrase, then generate a standard passphrase
.Pq length 20, no character or repetition constraints
for the
.Dq email
service.
.Pp
.
.Dl $ derivepassphrase vault \-\-key \-\-upper 9 \-\-lower 9 example.com
.Pp
.
Select an
.Tn SSH
key from the available suitable
.Tn SSH
keys in the running
.Tn SSH
agent, then generate a passphrase for the
.Li example.com
service using the previously selected
.Tn SSH
key.
The passphrase will have (standard) length 20, and at least nine characters
will be uppercase characters and at least another nine characters will be
lowercase characters.
.Pp
.
.Dl $ derivepassphrase vault \-\-key \-\-upper 9 \-\-lower 9 \-\-number 9 example.com
.Pp
.
Attempt to generate a passphrase as in the previous example.
.Em This
example will error out, because the passphrase constraints require at least
27 characters and the standard passphrase length 20 cannot accomodate this.
.Pp
.
.Dl $ derivepassphrase vault \-\-key \-\-upper 9 \-\-lower 9 \-\-space 2 \-\-config
.Pp
.
After selecting an
.Tn SSH
key, configure the default settings to use exactly nine uppercase characters,
nine lowercase characters, and two spaces for each generated passphrase.
(The specific service settings, or the command-line invocation, can still
override these settings.)
.Pp
.
.Dl $ derivepassphrase vault example.com
.Pp
.
Because of the previous setting, the generated passphrase for the
.Li example.com
service will behave as if
.Fl \-key \-upper Li 9 Fl \-lower Li 9 Fl \-space Li 2
had been specified during invocation (with the
.Tn SSH
key already having been selected).
In particular, it is neither necessary to specify
.Fl \-phrase No or Fl \-key
nor is it necessary to actually select an
.Tn SSH
key or to type in a master passphrase.
.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.
.Ex -std "derivepassphrase vault"
.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.
.Ss With other software
.
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
is
.Em almost
drop-in compatible with James Coglan's
.Xr vault 1 ,
version 0.3.0
.Pq including Do storeroom Dc support ,
meaning that each tool supports the same file formats and command-line
arguments/options as the other one.
.Pp
.
Exceptions:
.
.Bl -bullet
.
.It
.Xr vault 1
does not support the
.Sx "Compatibility and extension options"
listed above.
.
.It
.Nm derivepassphrase vault
can import and generate configuration exports in the same format as
.Xr vault 1 ,
but it cannot
.Em natively
read or write
.Xr vault 1
.Ns 's
configuration file
.Pq non-storeroom
or configuration directory
.Pq storeroom .
(The sister command
.Xr derivepassphrase-export 1
can read both these formats and export the contents.)
.
.El
.
.Ss Forward and backward compatibility
.
.Bl -bullet
.
.It
.Bo Since v0.2.0 . Bc
In v1.0, the commands
.Nm derivepassphrase
and
.Nm derivepassphrase export
will require an explicit subcommand name.
Both default to the subcommand
.Ic vault .
.
.It
.Bo Since v0.2.0 . Bc
In v1.0, the configuration data file for the
.Ic vault
subcommand will be named
.Pa vault.json ,
instead of
.Pa config.json .
.
.It
.Bo Since v0.2.0, to be removed in v1.0 . Bc
An existing configuration data file
.Pa config.json
will be attempted to be renamed to
.Pa vault.json .
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr derivepassphrase 1 ,
.Xr pageant 1 ,
.Xr ssh-agent 1 .
.Rs
.%A "James Coglan"
.%T "vault(1)"
.%U https://www.npmjs.com/package/vault
.Re
.Pp
.
Further online documentation for
.Xr derivepassphrase 1
.Pq tutorials, how-tos, reference and design documentation
is available at
.Lk https://the13thletter.info/derivepassphrase/ .
.
.Sh AUTHOR
.
.Lk mailto:software@the13thletter.info "Marco Ricci"
.
.Sh BUGS
.
.Bl -bullet
.
.It
The defaults are dictated by
.Xr vault 1 ,
necessitating the
.Sx Compatibility and extension options .
.Pq WONTFIX.
.
.It
The Windows version does not support
.Tn SSH
keys because Python on Windows does not support the predominant type of
inter-process communication used by
.Tn SSH
agents on Windows.
.
.El
.
